( docs )                                                               											          ( docs )

Vans Plan 12 Documentation
Variation Version 6


Vans Plan 12
	Vans Plan 12, also known as vp12, is the reference implementation for the Plan 12
	architecture of operating systems. vp12 is fully compatible will all standard
	Plan 12 tools and follows the architecture. This places it under the 'compliant'
	class (formally known as Class 1) defined by the Plan 12 specifcation, version 2.  

	vp12 is a fully kernel-less and
	scheduler-less operating system based on assembly programming using a small set of
	inline expanded macros for file-based IPC interfaces. This IPC interface is unified
	to represent all operations of the operating system, including hardware management,
	pseudo-scheduling, system boot-keeping, and (obviously) IPC. vp12 implements simple
	core isolation and native, real hardware multithredding using filesystems holding
	said IPC. Each filesystem is bound to one execution unit and all processes held in
	that filesystem run on that execution unit. 

	vp12 is designed to be incredibly small and simple, providing a fully unified 
	file-based IPC interface. vp12 pushes the idea that, if the OS is simple and
	unified, then application code will no longer be spaghetti-like and messy as the
	system default. Essentially, moving all system complexity into a unified protocol
	interface, allowing applications to not need to have mounds of edge handling.

	vp12, just as Plan 12, is a research system designed to explore a fully unified
	kernel-less and scheduler-less operating system architecture. This system is not
	intended to be used in production (although it would not be too bad at it) and
	is intended to be studied.

Filesystems
	One of the major optimizations of this operating system is that all logical
	blocks are padded to the exact size of one cache line. This decreases the
	maximum number of cycles one operation may take by a lot.
	The marker 'realsize' represents the actual size read, assuming the first
	N[b/B]. Only the last bits/Bytes are read, as marked by the 'realsize' 
	keyword used in the documentation. The data should be placed into the LOW area.

	All filesystems must be 512-byte aliagned, as well as all files on the filesystem.
	This means all fiesystems must not be on boundaries that are NOT multiples of 512
	and the same goes for files. This is a tradeoff for parsing speed.
	
	vp12 6 supports 3 main filesystems in the base system, being vp12vmfsf, 
	vp12sdfsf, and p12lsdfsf. Each of these serve a completely different purpose
	and have different structures associated with them to match said purposes.

	All filesystems must start with vp12-native internal metadata used to allow
	the system to identify the filesystem, no matter the type. This data includes
		64B(ytes), realsize 8b(its) - type of the filesystem
			Types -
				0000 0000 - vp12vmfsf
				0000 0001 - vp12sdfsf
				0000 0010 - vp12lsfsf
		64B, realsize 8B - disk/filesystem name (ASCII)

	vp12vmfsf is a shortening for Vans Plan 12 Virtual Memory FileSystem Format.
	The filesystem is a simple, linear and flat filesystem designed to hold 
	information used to schedule and store processes and manage the system itself.

	The first 192 bytes of a file will store basic info, being
	64B, realsize 8B  - file name (ASCII data)
	64B, realsize 8B  - fs name (again, ASCII data)
	64B, realsize 8B  - file type (finally, ASCII data (eg. proc, fsys, etc etc))
	This data is refereed to as the file 'metadata', although there isn't very
	much that is meta about it besides the fact it should always be present
	immediatly before every file.

	There must always be 512 bytes of blank data before the first file.

	This filesystem cannot store simple data, as it is used to store types of
	data used for simple scheduling, process communication, and bootkeeping.
	The types include
		STATE   (state) - file used to resume a process
		PROCESS (proc)  - file used to bootkeep a process
		BUFFER  (buff)  - file used for inter-process I/O
		SIGNAL  (sig)   - file used to represent a lightweight message
		FSYS    (fsys)  - file used to represent the execution unit

	STATE - This is a file used to resume process execution after a process
	has been stopped. 
		64B, realsize 8b     - process ID (ASCII value)
		64B, realsize 64b    - process start memory (64-bit memory address)
		64B, realsize 64b    - process end memory (64-bit memory address)
		64B, realsize 64b    - process re-entry point (64-bit memory address)
		64B, realsize 64b    - filesystem name (ASCII data)
		64B, realsize 448b   - register dump (RBX-RDI)  
		Not padded, 16386b   - register dump (ZMM0-ZMM31)

	NOTE - Process IDs should zero the first if not held. Eg. id 113 statys
			as 113, 13 becomes 013, and 3 becomes 003.

	NOTE - Process IDs are treated as 3-byte values, but it would be more optimal
			to treat them as 4-byte vales with a zero at the front. Actually, it
			would be most optimal (if the operation involves memory) to treat it
			as a 64bit value with 61 zero bytes (how it is stored).

		The naming convention for a state file is simply (ID).sav

	PROCESS - This is a file used to bootkeep a process
		64B, realsize 8b  - process ID 
		64B, realsize 8b  - process permission
		64B, realsize 64b - start memory
		64B, realsize 64b - end memory
		64B, realsize 64b - process entry point
		64B, realsize 64b - filesystem name

		The naming convention for processes is simply (ID).prc

	BUFFER - This is a file used to act as simple inter-process I/O
		64B, realsize 8b  - controlling process ID
		64B, realsize 8b  - controlling process permission
		64B, realsize 32b - size marker (binary number)
				This is a binary value used to tell the size of the
				buffer. The valid ranges are from -
					0000 0000 0000 0000 
					0000 0000 0000 0000
					- 0b size
				All the way to
					1111 1111 1111 1111
					1111 1111 1111 1111
					- very large buffer
		(variable size) - buffer data
			Note - buffer data (assuming bytes) MUST be a multiple of
			64. This is so it will fit into exactly N cache lines with
			no breaks or spills.

		A buffer can be used to hold process data, allow processes
		to communicate large I/O between each-other, and be used for
		standard input and output.

		Buffer files should follow the naming convention of (id).b(purpose)
		This could be (say for process ID 2) 2.b for a process with a single
		buffer, 2.bin for an input buffer, 2.bout for an output buffer, or
		another purpose.

	SIGNAL - this is a file used to act as a lightweight message
		64B, realsize 8b  - sender process ID
		64B, realsize 8b  - sender process permission
		64B, realsize 64b - sender process filesystem name
		64B, realsize 8b  - receiver process ID
		64B, realsize 8b  - receiver process permission
		64B, realsize 64b - receiver process filesystem name
		64B, realsize 16b - signal type (binary number)

		The signal types are used to tell a process what to do. A signal is
		generally used to request a process commit an action.
		Signal types are process-specific (eg. 0000 0000... 0000 may mean
		one thing to a VESA hardware manager and another to the shell)
		However, the general standard is 

			 0 0000 0000 0000 0000 - read standard input for an action
			 1 0000 0000 0000 0001 - read buffer specified by standard
						 input for an action
			 2 0000 0000 0000 0010 - read memory specified by standard 
						 input for an action
			 3 0000 0000 0000 0011 - write logical location in standard
						 input to standard output
			 4 0000 0000 0000 0100 - write logical location in standard
						 input to memory specified by
						 standard input (1st.2nd syntax)
			 5 0000 0000 0000 0101 - signal marking logical completion
						 of previous operation
			 6 0000 0000 0000 0110 - perform standard logical operation
						 to standard input
			 7 0000 0000 0000 0111 - perform standard logical operation
						 to standard output
			 8 0000 0000 0000 1000 - signal marking logical start of
						 current logical operation
			 9 0000 0000 0000 1001 - signal marking logical denial
						 of previous logical operation

		Signals follow the naming convention of (reciver id).s(signal type)
		eg. 2.s6. This can cause race conditiions and invalid writes if there
		are multiple processes sending the same singnal. The solution to this
		is to simply not have multiple processes sending the same signal type 
		to the same process. A process should only be performin one op at a 
		time anyway, so they should only be acting on one signal at a time.
		If the reciver gets a return when creating the signal that it did
		already exist, then they should wait a little bit and try again.

	FSYS - this is a small file used to represent control in the system.
		64B, realsize 64b - filesystem name
		64B, realsize 4b  - controlling execution unit (binary number)
		64B, realsize 8b  - controlling process ID
		
		This file exists once per filesystem and is used to represent the 
		system's scheduling.

		This file should simply be named fsys

	vp12sdfsf is a shortening for Vans Plan 12 Simple Disk FileSystem Format. 
	It is a very simple filesystem with very basic directory handling and 
	arbitrary file sizes.

	The filesystem is a very simple write-optimized filesystem with zero global
	metadata. Instead, files appear fully linear on-disk using simple data inside
	the file entry itself containing information such as name, directory
	placement and sizing. Files themselves are not 'in directories' on-disk, but
	are instead given a piece of data to show what directory to place them in on
	the system. Every file start must be on a block of 512B(ytes). This means
	files not exactly 8096B must have padding rounding their size up to the
	nearest 512B value.

	Although it is known as a disk filesystem, it does not HAVE to be on a
	disk. The filesystem can be on any media supporting writes (and in some
	cases, media only supporting append mode and read-only).

	The format goes
		64B, realsize 32B - file name (ASCII) padded with zeros
		64B, realsize 8b  - file type 
			Types - 
				0000 0000 - unformatted/raw
				0000 0000 - raw (disk image)
				0000 0010 - machine code binary (AMD64 Tigerlake)
				0000 0011 - vp12 format binary (AMD64 TigerLake)
				0000 0100 - machine code binary (AMD64 IceLake)
				0000 0101 - vp12 format binary (AMD64 IceLake)
				0000 0110 - machine code binary (generic Xeon-class)
				0000 0111 - vp12 format binary (generic Xeon-class)
				0000 1000 - machine code binary (generic AMD64)
				0000 1001 - vp12 format binary (generic AMD64)
				0000 1010 - ASCII data
				0000 1011 - iASM assembler source (TigerLake)
				0000 1100 - iASM assembler source (IceLake)
				0000 1101 - vp12 macro expansion source
				0000 1110 - generic logfile
				0000 1111 - ISO image
				0001 0000 - EFI executable image
				0001 0001 - vp12 STATE dump
				0001 0010 - vp12 PROCESS dump
				0001 0011 - vp12 BUFFER dump
				0001 0100 - vp12 SIGNAL dump
				0001 0101 - vp12 FSYS dump
				0001 0110 - generic dump
				0001 0111 - vp12 vp12vmfsf dump
				0001 1000 - vp12 vp12sdfsf dump
				0001 1001 - vp12 vp12lsfsf dump
				
				0001 1010 to 1111 1111 - undefined/invalid/other

				These types are used to allow the reading process to 
				know how to interpret or use the data. They are not
				required and are simply standardized conventions.
		Not padded, 2048B - directory path (ASCII)
			This one is a bit special. This one is used to determine what
			directory to place the file in when presenting it to the user.
			This is simply the directory names separated by a ':' 
			character with the ':' characters at the start and ends.
			
			An example could be 
				:dir1:dir2: 
			If the name of the disk is disk1 and the file file1, then
			the file will be presented as 
				disk1:dir1:dir2:file1
			
			The only limit to the number of dirs the file may be in is
			the amount of characters allowed in the dir field.

		This filesystem should be implimented as a process managing the disk.
		It should piggy-back off of the disk device presented by the multiplexer
		process and present abstract filesystem I/O.

		The process should have 3 buffers and use 3 signal types.
			buffer .bin for messages written to it,
			buffer .bout for output data given by it,
			signal 5 sent by it at completion of an operation,
			signal 6 sent to it to read a file to .bout,
			and signal 7 sent to it to write a file from .bin.

		When reading, .bin should just contain the path of the file to read, and
		should contain the path of the file to write with a newline before the
		data to write to the file for writting.

		An example may be

			Writting

				.bin
					disk1:dir:file
					Hello, World!

				- send signal 7
				- wait for signal 5

			Reading

				.bin
					disk1:dir:file

				- send signal 6
				- wait for signal 5

				.bout
					Hello, World!

	
	p12lsdfsf is a shortening for the filesystem known as the Plan 12 Long String
	Filesystem Format. This filesystem is characterized by not simply storing files,
	but instead storing variable length strings of variable format data with 
	expressive tags explicitly marking the relation held between said strings. The
	tags in the filesystem is used to re-order strings into file-like objects at
	runtime. This concept was pulled from a theoretical multiplexing system in the
	Plan 12 family known as mp12, a shortening of Multiplexed Plan 12. However, in
	mp12, the tags are used to hold permission data used to allow specific files to
	be multiplexed across specific files via a layered signal system to allow 
	specific processes to only view specific strings. Essentially, each 'layer' of
	the OS has a different permission. Data flowing downward is tagged as strings,
	and the layer sending the data to the application simply removes all strings 
	tagged in a way so the layer receiving the data does not have access to the data
	the tags believe it should not. 

	At the time of writing this, mp12 is a conceptual system ugly outlined
	and not yet implemented by a specification. 

	Anyways, that was just a little piece Plan 12 trivia. 


	The filesystem works by storing strings linearly on the disk and using a simple
	linear searching system to find strings associated with the file being received
	or opened and mapping the data to the file based on the strings dynamically at
	runtime. The filesystem is incredibly unusual and abstract, but allows for 
	very complex relations - since files are not held as 'files', sections of files
	can have relations and tags instead of simply the entire file. This allows for
	a new level of expressive indexing at a database level not seen in any popular
	database, but instead built into the filesystem itself.

TODO - p12lsfsf

Process Model
	In this version of Plan 12, all processes are represented by files on a 
	filesystem. This allows for a uniform and dead simple interface simply by
	interacting with files. In this version, all processes are simply files. All
	process communication is done through simple file operations, AKA by 
	creating/writing to buffer files and creating signal files. 

	Every active execution unit is bound to one filesystem by the FSYS file. The
	filesystem holds the information used to bootkeep processes, bootkeep 
	scheduling, and allow for processes to communicate between each other.

	Processes are designed to be single-purpose entities communicating between
	each other. One process per logical operation or purpose, essentially. One
	process should not fill multiple logical roles, or else race conditions or 
	inconsitecies in the operation's state may occor due to signal type schematics.

	The system is oriented to co-operative scheduling, but since it uses scheduling
	primitives instead of a standard scheduler, any scheduler model can be emulated
	with careful co-operation. This is one of the key advantages to this system.
	Simply since there is no scheduler, any scheduler can be used per execution 
	unit.

	This is one of the largest advantages of the Vans Plan 12 system; the ability
	to tie any scheduler of any sorts (or multiple, in theory) to one execution unit.
	This allows for system flexibility not achieved by any other operating system.
	This also allows for the system to be incredibly performant and expressive;
	the user can simply choose what cores should run what schedulers and what processes
	to place in said scheduling areas based on the process's or workload's needs.
	Compare this to something like UNIX, where the system runs one global
	scheduler, and processes that should run slower on this scheduler model than 
	another do not have another option but to simply run at a lower efficiency.

	Because of the per execution unit basis, the system is naively multithreaded
	and scales very well. However, do not confuse this for isolation. The system 
	has zero memory protection and the standard writing macros assume any
	execution unit can read and write to or from any region of memory. This is a 
	major trade-off of the Plan 12 architecture in general to allow the system
	to not require a kernel in general. However, the Plan 12 architecture does
	make room for a permission model, but does not force it onto the processes
	of the system like a UNIX may.

	Processes generally follow the lifespan of
		Be given control -> check for signal file(s) related to it -> perform
		action(s) based on signal said file(s) -> send signal(s) as return => 
		hand off

	Unless a process is special-purpose (eg. it will always know what it's buffers
	are, where they are, and what it needs to do), signals will be the 'conductor'
	of the process. This means signals are essentially a request for a process to
	perform a specific action. This is very useful to use, as it is a lot easier
	to parse than a buffer.

	By the current signal implementation of Vp12 version 6 (this version), I could
	read keyboard input by simply reading a file. This is another major advantage
	of the Vans Plan 12 system, as every interface is a process-managed endpoint
	exposed as IPC. (and as such, exposed as files, since the IPC subsystem is 
	just a part of the file subsystem) 

Hardware Management
	In vp12, hardware devices are not managed by a kernel or privelaged subsystem, 
	but instead by a small set of processes, one process dedicated per device (refered
	to as hardware devices or hardware processes)

	These generally are held in their own memfs due to performance reasons, as they
	need isolated scheduling. These memfs-es generally either use round-robin (in
	the case of memfs01) or simply do not use a scheduler (in the case of memfs02).
	This takes full advantage of one of the biggest benifits of using a vp12 system;
	that every execution unit can run it's own scheduler and can be tuned to it's
	specific workload.

	These hardware devices should be able to be used and found globally by 
	the convention that they should always be placed into the same memfs-es by 
	the same IDs. However, there is also the standard multiplexer device, which
	will copy buffers and signals over to the proper process based on a database.
	This will allow processes to simply be able to know to 'write to dspin.b is the
	display device input file' instead of having to track what hardware devices 
	the user has installed on the system.

	Currently, hardware devices include
		vesadsp - device for VESA display devices		- display device
				buffers in and out
					in should take a raw, exact-size and color
					bitmap image into the input file to be 
					rendered to the display
					out should output the current framebuffer 
					as an exact size and color bitmap image

				signals 5, 6, and 7
					5 should be sent from after an operation is completed
					6 should be sent to when the process wants to render
					the image in the in buffer to the display
					7 should be sent to when the process wants to get the
					current framebuffer

				Class - Bitmap Display Device (item 4)

				summary
					This process talks to a VESA display. It takes 
					a signal type of 6 to render the data in the in
					buffer as an exact size and color bitmap image
					and sends a signal of 5 back. It takes a signal
					type of 7 to write the current framebuffer as an
					exact size and color bitmap image to the out buffer
					and sends a signal type of 5 back. 
					
		ps2kdb 	- device for PS2 keyboard devices		- keyboard device
				buffer out
					out should be used to hold the current batched 
					contents of the input

				Class - ASCII Input Device (item 3)

				summary
					This process will batch the keyboard input from 
					the standard PS2 keyboard port to a memory buffer
					and occasionally append the entire buffer to the
					out buffer and clear the memory buffer.


		tty	- abstraction device for printing characters	- tty device
				buffer in
					in should take a stream of ASCII characters
					to be written to the display.

				signals 5 and 6
					6 should be sent to render the in buffer to the
					display and 5 should be sent when the operation is
					complete.

			Class - Bitmap Character Device (item 2)

				summary
					This process will wait for a signal type of 6.
					When it recieves it, it will convert the ASCII
					stream of characters in the in buffer to a bitmap
					image and render it to the display.


		nvme - nvme device handler
			buffers in and out
				in should contain the start block, a dash (-) character, the end
				block, a newline then the raw data to write to the blocks for
				writting and the same first line for reading. When reading,
				it will write the contents to the out buffer.

			Signals 5, 6, 7
				6 sent to write the data formatted from in to the blocks specified,
				7 to read the blocks specified by the in buffer to the out buffer,
				and 5 sent at completion.

			Class - Disk or disk-like (item 1)

			Summary
				This process will wait for a signal type 6 or 7. At 6, it will
				write data (formatted (start sector)-(end-sector)(newline)(data)) to the
				sectors specified from the in buffer. At signal 7, it will read the
				sectors specifed (same format, simply without the data) to the out
				buffer, and under both, it will send a signal of 5 when completed.
				Note - this device should be expected to share an execution unit with
				the filesystem handler for the drive. In most cases, this would be the
				handler for the vp12sdfsf or vp12lsfsf.

	The standard multiplexer device will simply copy the buffers and signals of
	hardware devices to standard buffers. These buffers can be defined in the
	config file at memfs09:stdmtplx - this should be a configuration file loaded
	by the standard multiplexer at start. This file should use the syntax of
	(real file) => (fake file). The standard config file should contain the contents

		memfs01:2.bin => memfs01:dspl.bin
		memfs01:2.bout => memfs01:dspl.bout
		memfs01:2.s5 => memfs01:dspl.s5
		memfs01:2.s6 => memfs01:dspl.s6
		memfs01:2.s7 => memfs01:dspl.s7
		memfs01:3.bin => memfs01:tty.bin
		memfs01:3.s6 => memfs01:tty.s6
		memfs02:1.bout => memfs01:kbd.bout
		memfs03:1.bout => memfs01:disk.bout
		memfs03:1.bin => memfs01:disk.bin
		memfs03:1.s5 => memfs01:disk.s5
		memfs03:1.s6 => memfs01:disk.s6
		memfs03:1.s7 => memfs01:disk.s7
		memfs03:2.s7 => memfs01:fs.s7
		memfs03'2.s5 => memfs01:fs.s5
		memfs03'2.s6 => memfs01:fs.s6
		memfs03'2.bin => memfs01:fs.bin
		memfs03'2.bout => memfs01:fs.bout

	Older versions of this multiplexer were more complex and would handle
	devices differently depending on the third item, now dropped. This was
	to allow a standard interface for devices. However, it is now up to the
	device itself to provide a standard interface.

Scheduling
	Vans Plan 12, unlike normal operating systems, does not have it's own 
	independent scheduler. Instead, the system uses simple cooperative-oriented
	scheduling primitives to allow processes to schedule themselves. Due to the
	flexibility of the primitives, any scheduling method can be emulated by them.
	Another very useful feature, because every execution unit is fully isolated
	by the filesystem, this means that every execution unit may run on a different
	scheduler. This is normally taken into effect in the base system by running
	separate schedulers for separate hardware devices, such as round-robin for
	display-related devices such as the TTY and framebuffer, or even no scheduler
	at all in the case of the kbd device. Every scheduler is bound to a filesystem,
	which is bound to one execution unit, as described previously.

	Scheduling is done through a small set of inline assembler macros expanded 
	at compile time. This allows for very low overhead system operations. These
	macros express simple yet flexible co-operative primitives that may be used 
	for any purpose the processes using them wishes. This allows for an entire
	new class of systems flexibility and expressiveness not present in any other
	operating systems or execution architecture.
	
	The one downside to all of this; in a standard install, there is no scheduler
	protection, allowing any process to create or hand off to any process of any
	permission. This is, as most decisions in the system, a trade-off reducing
	security and error tolerance for performance and code efficiency.

	For more information on how scheduling actually takes place, see the section 
	on macros.

Standard interfaces
	This section describes standardised interfaces for service managers to allow
	processes to not need to know how to write to each specific independent deviec
	variation differently.

	This will give a detailed, implimentation-focused description of the management
	interface and behavior of devices.

	Disks and disk-like devices, class 'Disk or disk-like', item 1
		Disks should have 2 buffers and use 3 signals. Buffers bin and bout and
		signals 5, 6, and 7. Buffer bin should be used to write raw data to the
		disk. It should contain the format of, the first line having the start
		sector, an ASCII dash character (-), then the end sector, followed by
		an ASCII newline character, then the raw data you wish to write. The
		service should then recieve a signal type of 6 to write this data to
		the blocks specified by the first line. The device should send a signal
		of type 5 in return at completion. To read, you should simply ommit the 
		data from the bin buffer and send a signal type of 7. The device will then
		copy said sector's raw data to the bout buffer and send a signal type of
		5 in return.

	Teletype, class 'Bitmap Character Device', item 2
		Teletype devices should have 1 buffer and use 2 signals. Buffer bin and
		signals 5 and 6. Buffer bin should be a byte stream representing sprites
		to render to the display. These sprites should be held in memfs07, 
		formatted as vp12vmfsf. These should be a 12x12 image of the symbol. The name of 
		the sprite should be 8 bits, aka one byte, held in ASCII format, just as the
		byte of the character written to bin. When a signal of 6 is given, 
		the service should check the directory and match the file name against the
		byte stream in bin. The service should, assuming a bitmap display device 
		as the backend, append the image associated with the name to the display,
		once for each byte in the stream, then send a signal of 5 in return. The
		path should contain at least one file for every printable ASCII character,
		but can contain arbitrary images.

	Keyboards, class 'ASCII Input Device', item 3
		Keyboard deviecs should only require one signal, being buffer bout. This
		buffer should hold an output stream of ASCII format characters translated
		from whatever may come from the input stream. In standard implimentations,
		this is a conversion table or function from PS2 scan codes into ASCII 
		characters, some special handling for non-printable characters or special
		characters such as the newline, and a system to output or dump said
		characters to the bout buffer. Simply, a device translating some form of
		input data into ASCII characters and writting it to it's output buffer.

	Bitmap displays, class 'Bitmap display device', item 4
		Bitmap display devices should have 2 buffers and 3 signals. Buffers bin and
		bout and signals 5, 6, and 7. Buffer bin should take a 1920x1200x32 nonpacked
		bitmap image into the file to be rendered to the display. If this does not
		match the size of the physical display, then the process handling this should
		make some form of ajustment before rendering. When a signal of type 6 to render 
		the contents of the bin buffer to the display and a signal with a type of 5
		once the operation is completed. When given a signal type of 7, the current
		display image should be written to the bout buffer in the same format as
		required for the bin buffer with a signal type of 5 sent back at completion.

Filesystem standards
	Filesystem memfs01 should be dedicated to hardware. This filesystem should run
	the multiplexer device as process 1, the bitmap display device as process 2, 
	and the teletype device as process 3. This should also be where the multiplexer
	device exposes the logical endpoints for devices. This filesystem should be
	created by the init phase of the system and be formatted as vp12vmfsf. This
	filesystem should run a round-robin scheduler.

	Filesystem memfs02 should be dedicated to the keyboard device. This should not
	run any other processes, but simply the keyboard device. This filesystem should
	be created by the init phase of the system and should be formatted as vp12vmsfsf.
	This filesystem should not run a scheduler.

	Filesystem memfs03 should be dedicated to the disk hander process and the 
	filesystem handler process. The filesystem handler should run as process 2 and
	the disk manager as process 1. Thils filesystem should be created by the init
	phase of the system and should be formatted as vp12vmfsf. This filesystem should
	run a round-robin scheduler

	Filesystem memfs04 should be dedicated to user processes. This filesystem should
	be created during the init phase of teh system and should be formatted as vp12vmfsf.
	This filesystem should run a co-operative scheduler.

	Filesystem memfs07 should be dedicated to the teletype device's sprites. This
	filesystem should not be used to store processes, but instead to store vp12vmfsf
	buffer files. This filesystem should be created by the init phase of the system and
	should be formatted as vp12vmfsf.

	Filesystem memfs09 should be dedicated to system configuration files. This
	filesystem should not be used to store processes, but instead vp12vmfsf buffer files.
	This filesystem should be created by the init phase of the system and formatted as
	vp12vmfsf.

Macros
	Vans Plan 12 is an assembler-oriented operating system, meaning higher level
	languages do NOT support the system's primitives. The operating system uses
	a system of language independent macro substitutions for system functions.
	Although the macro system is language-independent (because it is 
	pre-compilation), the system function macros are written in assembly.

	The macro system, known as vp12smsl (Vans Plan 12 Simple Macro Substitution
	Language) is a pre-compile macro language based on simple text and argument
	substitution. This macro system is used for several system functions, such as
	scheduling and vp12vmfsf parsing. The language follows the syntax of 

		#define,(name) - keyword to define a macro, followed by a ',' character
			  and the macro name followed by the text to substitute
			  the associated call statements of the same name with on newline
			  a newline (eg.
				'#DEFINE,examplename
				thing1
				thing2'
				&ENDSEC)
		@call,(name),(arg(s))   - keyword to call a macro, followed by a ',' character, 
			  further followed by another ',' character (if) followed
			  by arguments to substitute separated by commas (eg, with
			  zero arguments it could be '@CALL,examplename', and with
			  multiple arguments it could be 
			  '@CALL,examplename,example1,example2,example3') 
		&endsec,(name) - keyword used to end the definition of a macro. Must be 
			  present after the final newline of the #DEFINE keyword.
		%arg(argnum)   - keyword used to represent an argument in code. Argument
			  number being the numerical order it was defined by in the
			  @CALL statement.
		
		*(varname) - substitute an arbitrary variable (eg. *var)
		!(varname),(value) - define an arbitrary variable (eg. !var,18)
		##      - comment

		Variables should be assiagned as soon as they are mentioned in the ! or !!
		statement. No lazy assiagnment.

	A full example piece of code could be

		memfs04:macros.smsl
			#define,func
			mov %arg1, RAX
			mov %arg2, RBX
			!var,'data'
			!reg,r8
			mov *reg, *var
			&endsec
		memfs04:code.asm
			@Ccall,func,rdi,rsi

	After macro processing, memfs04:code.asm's @CALL statement will be replaced
	with
		mov rdi, rax
		mov rsd, rbx
		mov r8, 'data'

	NOTE - 
		Variables should be substituted BEFORE arguments - this means an argument can
		contain a variable but a variable CANNOT contain an argument.

	Vans Plan 12 uses this macro system for system functions. A process can simply
	call a macro to perform a standard operation instead of having to know how to
	perform it. However, the process calling the macro is still performing the 
	operation themselves.

	The system keeps the file 'memfs09:glb.smsl'. This file contains all
	macro definitions for standard system functions. The current macros included
	in Vans Plan 12 release version 6 are listed below.
		
		spawn (name) (memfs) (permission) (executable path) (start memory)
			(end memory) (entry)
			spawn is the macro used to create a process using a binary
			written in standard flat, memory-dependent machine code. If
			the binary does not use the native OS format, this macro can
			be used to spawn the binary. Keep in mind, the binary must
			expect the system to be in 64bit protected mode, as this is
			what the operating system hands off in.

			This macro WILL check permissions. If the memory region
			is already allocated, then the process with a higher ID will be
			killed to free the memory using the KILL macro.

			name  		- name of the process to be created
			memfs 		- memfs to spawn the process in
			executable path - full path to the executable file
			permission	- permission to spawn the process with
			start memory	- start memory region to place the binary
			end memory	- end memory region to place the binary
			entry		- entry point of the program

			All of this metadata is normally embedded into the OS
			executable format. However, this macro is used to spawn a
			process explicitly not using this format.
	
		spawnnf (name) (memfs) (permission) (executable path)
			spawnnf is the macro used to create a process using a binary
			written in the OS native format. This macro simply parses
			the binary format to get the last three arguments of SPAWN, 
			supplements them, and calls SPAWN. 
			Yes, this macro is a wrapper around SPAWN for convenience.
			I guess you could also say the same thing about the OS 
			executable format.

			name            - name of the process to be created
			memfs           - memfs to spawn the process in
			executable path - full path to the executable file
			permission      - permission to spawn the process with

		start (id)
			start is the macro used to begin executing a spawned process.
			In older versions of vp12 (~3.X - early 5.X), the SPAWN macros
			would immediately start executing the process being created. 
			However, it was later realized this could cause ordering issues
			when setting up some types of pseudo-schedulers, such as a 
			round-robin scheduler.

			All this macro does is parse the filesystem for the process
			info, update the system state to show the new controlling 
			process, and jump to the process's entry address specified by
			the file previously parsed

			id    - id of the process to start

		save (memfs) (id)
			save is the macro used to save the current state of a process.
			This macro will simply dump usable registers of the process
			to a file, as well as information used to resume the process
			later. Essentially, this is the macro used to set up the 
			resume state for the pseudo-scheduler.

			Registers RBX to RBP as well as zmm0 to zmm31 to the state
			file allocated to the process.

			memfs - memfs of the process to save
			id    - id of the process to save

		yield (id to yield to)
			This macro will update the FSYS file and hand control to another
			process. This will NOT save the state of the process, as unlike
			in older versions of vp12, SAVE is not called in this macro and
			must be called before.

			id to yield to - id of the new process give control

		exit (memfs)
			This macro is used to exit the process completely. This will
			remove all files associated with the process ID and hand off
			to the default process mentioned by the FSYS file. The
			FSYS file will be updated to show the new control. Something to
			note, memory used by the process is not cleared, but the 	
			process allocation files are no longer present, macros will
			believe the memory is free and re-allocate it to another 
			process when needed.

			memfs - memfs of the process to exit

		kill (memfs) (id)
			This is essentially the same as EXIT, but it does not hand
			off to a new process after. This does NOT update the FSYS file
			in any way. 

			memfs - memfs of the process to kill
			id    - id of the process to kill

		continue (memfs)
			This macro will simply call SAVE and hand control off to the
			default process marked by the FSYS file. This is used as a way
			to exit a process without freeing it's memory or killing it.

			memfs - name of the memfs to perform the action on

		FALL (memfs)
			This will simply calculate the lowest ID process in a memfs
			and hand off to it. This is a primitive to restart scheduling
			and is used to emulate round-robin systems with a bit more
			ease.

			memfs - name of the memfs to perform the action on

		addmem (start) (end) (name) (format) (core) (default ID)
			This is the macro used to create a filesystem in a memory
			region. This simply will zero the memory regions (without a 
			check if they are allocated), create the FSYS file if the fs
			is formatted as vp12vmfsf, initialize the core if the fs is
			formatted as vp12vmfsf, and set RAX to the current memfs name.

			start      - start memory region to allocate
			end        - end memory region to allocate
			name       - name for the new fs
			format     - format for the mew fs
			core       - (not required) core to bind the (if 
					format=vp12vmfsf) memfs to 
			default ID - (not required) default ID to set in the (if 
					format=vp12vmfsf) FSYS file

		mov (srctype) (src) (dstype) (dst)
			This macro will parse the src and dst type as either an fs 
			format name or 'mem' for a memory region and buffer the data
			pointer as srcthrough AVX512 vector registers into the dst 
			path.

			srctype - type of source
			src     - path of source
			dstype  - type of dst
			dst     - path of destination

		parsefs ([sig|buff|state|proc|fsys]) (memfs) (name) ([creat|nocreat])
			This macro is used to parse a file in a vp12vmfsf fs.	
			This macro will return R8 as the pointer to the start of the file,
			R9 as the size of the file, and, if creat is give, R12 set as all 
			1s if it was created, or if nocreat is give, R12 as 1 if the 
			file exists.

			Old versions used to set R11 as the start to the file metadata,
			but this was removed to help free an extra internal scratch
			register. This data can be found at [r8 - 192], aka the start
			of the file, minus 192 bytes.

			The different values of argument 1 set the type of the file 
			to parse.

			arg1  - type of file to parse
			memfs - memfs the file is located in
			name  - name of the file
			arg4  - create or do not create file if not present

		conv (reg)
			This macro is used for argument expansion. If the first
			argument is the name of a register, the data in said register
			will be returned in the r9 register. If there is data after the
			register name (ASCII) in the argument, it will be packed
			into the regiser in the high side, shifting the extra low data
			out. If arg1 is not a register name, it will simply return the 
			data placed in arg1 into r9.

		tcefi
			This is a system init stub for TianoCore UEFI systems. This
			macro is used to create the stage 1 env described in the
			bootstrap docs.
		
		coolstrap
			This is the macro for the default system init stub. This
			macro is used to create the working env for the standard 
			vp12 programming env described in the bootstrap docs.

Programs using memory should not address it directly, but instead relative to variables
startmem, endmem and procent. These variables should be set by the macro expander at
system compile-time and should. This allows a process to not need to be placed into any
specific area of memory, but instead allowed to dynamically change at compile-time.

Executable format
	This operating system, as most do, provides it's own native execution format.
	This is a very simple format built around static memory-dependent (memory
	sections of a process are typically defined at compile-time via the argument
	substitution system mentioned earlier) binary with extra metadata to fill a 
	lot of the arguments mentioned by the SPAWN macro earlier.

	The format goes
		SPAWN (name) (memfs) (permission) (executable path) (start memory)
		(end memory) (entry)

		64B, realsize 8B - memory start
		64B, realsize 8B - memory end
		64B, realsize 8B - memory usage size
		64B, realsize 8B - process entry point
		
		Then the optional debug data
		The debug data is a list of all macros used in order of when they
		are called. The reason for this is to allow developers to easily
		read the data and know what macros are used without manually searching
		the binary.
		
		For every macro called,
		64B, realsize varies - macro name (ASCII string)
		not padded, 64B      - blank marker (next macro)

		And then 128B of blank data to mark the end of the metadata.

	Pretty simple, hm? This format has a minimum size overhead of 384 bytes
	of data. I know this is a lot, but this follows the padding model of the OS.
	
	All of this replaces the last three arguments of the SPAWN macro. AKA for the
	macro to spawn an OS-native binary (SPAWNNF), the last three arguments of 
	SPAWN are not needed and simply dropped.

VP12P
	12P is a universal Plan 12 format for remote data sync standard in Plan 12 
	operating systems. Since vp12 is a Class 1 Plan 12 operating system, a compatable
	implimentation of 12P is included into the base system. This includes the
	filesystem format and packet protocol. This implimentation of the 12P protcol
	implimeted in the vp12 operating system is known as 'vp12p', also known as
	Vans Plan 12 Protocol, as opposed to the Plan 12 Protocol.

	This section of documentation will only discuss the specifics of the implimentation
	of the 12P protocol specific to the vp12 operating system.

	The microarch name should be set based on the *march variable compiled into the
	program, although this can usually be something untrue and it will not matter
	too much as long as it matches the arch of the *arch variable (eg. *march Tigerlake
	wich *arch amd64). This maps to 12P 'logical microarch name'.
	The arch name should be set by the *arch variable, however this should be set to 
	'amd64', since VP12 only supports 64bit PC platforms. The *arch variable should
	always be held lowercase with the *march variable having just the first character
	capitalized.
	The *ed variable should hold the logical endianness of the system, and since VP12
	is always to run on an amd64 machine, this should always be set to binary 01, AKA
	'little' by the 12P standard. This maps to the 'logical endianness name' in the 12P
	standard.
	The Plan 12 implimentation name should always be set to 'VP12'.
	The variable *vp12v should hold the VP12 implimentation number, which for this
	version should be 6. This variable maps to the 12P 'Plan 12 implimentation version'
	field.
	The variable *p12v is mapped to the field 'Plan 12 version' and should usually be
	set to 2.
	The variable *p12c is mapped to the field 'Plan 12 compliance version' and should
	usually be 1, since VP12 version 6 is compliant against Plan 12 version 2, tier 1,
	as it is the reference version and would obviously be of the highest tier.
	The variable *12pv maps to the '12P version' field, and should generally be 2.
	The variable *12piv maps to the '12P implimentation version', which should currently
	just be 1, since there is only one version of VP12P.
	The machine ID is generated at the start of the process creation, and should always
	be the first thing it does.
	The filesystem names sent should be the literal filesystem name, in lowercase ASCII,
	eg. vp12vmfsf, vp12lsfsf, vp12sdfsf, and so on if there are more.

POSIX
	It is theoretically possible to make a POSIX C compiler for a vp12 compliant system,
	although it may prove to be very difficult. This has been loosley thought on by the
	development team (AKA me) and a few ideas have floated around

		Runtime intepreting and injecting
			Slow. This idea is a bit silly, due to how overwealmingly slow it would be.
			It is most definetly possible, but incredibly slow.

		Make vp12 into UNIX
			You wish.

		Make the compiler do everythig
			Have the compiler understand things like file descriptors, special paths
			(eg proc, dev, so on), syscalls linking and have it output a format
			compatable with vp12. Eg, instead of a write syscall on /dev/tty, it could
			output vp12-specific code to talk to the tty device.

			This is the most practical.


		Under the third option mentioned (the only likley one), a few items could be
		ported

			open() -> signals and buffers talking to the file server + the compiler 
						managing the file descriptors
			read() -> simular to open()
			write() -> simular to read()
			exec() -> spawn a new process
			fork() -> just exec() and hope it does not fall apart
			pthreads() -> spawn a worker process on another memfs
			malloc() -> not sure / ignored possibly (??) - maybe alloc a buff file

		The compiler would see these operations and match them to assembler output 
		that can be assembled by the vp12 ASSEMBLE and macro system EXPAND based
		on a substitutions config file.

		This work is also useful for designing a high-level programming language for the
		Plan 12/VP12 system. Concepts present in high-level languages are mostly POSIX
		concepts (for some arbitrary reason) and this maps pretty well. However, a
		high-level language native to VP12 will most likley not be made any time soon,
		as assembler language is enough to express it properly In fact, the macro system
		in itslef is a high-level language of sorts in it's own little way and can be
		used to build an entire language in itself on top of assembler. A POSIX layer
		will most likley be made just to make adoption slightly easer, and it will
		probably be made by making a simple C front-end based on a backend using the
		macro language of VP12.

The Standard Library
	The Standard Libary (std.smsl) is a macro definitions file designed to make the life
	of a developer targetting a VP12 system easier. It adds simple high-level operations
	as macros instead of manual parsing/walking.

	Varbables
		The file defines two variables per hardware device - *Nfs and *N. *Nfs being
		the filesystem the hardware device is in, and *N being the process ID of the
		hardware process (N being the process itself). Eg. *dsplfs, *kbdfs, *tty, so on.

		The file also defines variables *myfs and *myid, *myfs being the filesystem of
		the current process, and *myid being the ID of the current process.

	Macros
		dial fs, procid, buffname

			Dial will find a buffer in the filesystem. It should return r12 as 1 if it was
			found, r11 as the size of the buffer, and r8 as a pointer to the start of the
			data section of the buffer. 

			fs should be the filesystem of the buffer to find, procid should be the 
			process ID of the owner of the buffer, and buffname should be the name of 
			the buffer (what comes afer N.b in the name.)

			Example 
				@call,dial,'*dsplfs','*tty','in'
				@call,dial,'*myfs','*myid','in'

		create fs, procid, size, buffname

			Create will create a buffer if it does not alerady exist. It should return r12
			as 1 if created, r11 as the size of the buffer, and r8 as a pointer to the start of the
			buffer data area. Note this maintains compatability with the return values of
			Dial (even with r12, since it should be 1 unless something went wrong).

			fs should be the filesystem to create the buffer in, procid should be the ID of
			the process owning the buffer, size should be the size of the buffer, and
			buffname should be the name of the buffer (what comes after N.b.).

			Examples
				@call,create,'*myfs','*myid',512,'tmp'
				@call,create,'*myfs','12',512,'in'

		poll senderfs, senderprocid, recvfs, recvid, sigtype, count

			Poll will poll for a signal file and return once it is found or once the 
			count has expired. r12 should be returned as a 1 if the signal was found.

			senderfs should be the filesystem of the sender, recvfs should be the
			filesystem of the target process, senderprocid should be the ID of the sender,
			recvprocid should be the ID target process, sigtype should be the type of
			signal and count being the number of times to poll for the signal

			Examples
				@call,poll,'*ttyfs','*tty','*myfs','*myid',5,32

		signal senderfs, senderprocid, recvfs, recvprocid, sigtype

			Signal is used to send a signal to another process. It should return r12 as 1
			to maintain return compatability with Poll.

			senderfs should be the filesystem of the sender process, senderprocid should
			be the ID of the sender process, recvfs should be the filesystem of the 
			target process, recvprocid should be the ID of the target process, and sigtype
			should be the type of signal to be send.

			Examples
				@call,signal,'*myfs','*myid','*dsplfs','*tty',5

		clean fs, procid

			Clean is used to cleanly exit a process, removing all data owned by it. 
			Unlike the exit of glb.smsl, this macro will remove the buffers and signals
			owned by it or sent to said process before exiting it.

			fs should be the filesystem to clean, and procid should be the
			process ID of the process to clean.

			Examples
				@call,clean,'*myfs','*myid'
				@call,clean,'*dsplfs','*tty'

Other Libraries
	This section describes other macro libraries held in the system. These are just
	general functions for complex operations simplified to single macros.

	The libraries include

		aml.smsl - ASCII manipulation library
			This library includes operations for ASCII manipulation, such as
			converting ASCII to binary and vise versa.

			Macros
				caui data
					Convert ASCII data to an unsigned integer and store to
					register r12. Data must be able to fit into 64 bits.
					This applies to the data in both ASCII format and as an
					unsigned 64bit integer. Zero data will be ignored.

					Example
						@call,caui,'182'
						@call,caui,'21843'

				cuia data
					Convert an unsigned integer into ASCII data and store to
					register r12, Data must be able to fit into 64 bits.
					This applies to the data in both ASCII format and as an
					unsigned 64bit integer. Zero data will be ignored.

					Example
						@call,cuia,1972
						@call,cuia,92732
Examples
	Here, a few example programs will be showcased

	Hello, World, using the TTY process (no lazy parsing)

			@call,parsefs,'fsys','rax','fsys','nocreat'
			mov rbx, [r8 + 191]
		loop1:
			@call,parsefs,'buff','memfs01','3.bin','nocreat'
			cmp r12, 1
			jne loop1
			cmp [r8 + 188], 2
			jle exitcase
			mov [r8 + 192], 'hi'
		loop2:
			@call,parsefs,'sig','memfs01','3.s6','creat'
			cmp r12, 1
			jne loop2
			mov [r8 + 63], rbx
			mov [r8 + 184], rax
			mov [r8 + 255], '3'
			mov [r8 + 376], 'memfs01'
			mov [r8 + 447], 6
		loop3:
			@call,parsefs,'sig','rax','rbx.s5','nocreat'
			cmp r12, 1
			jne loop3
			cmp [r8 + 63], '3'
			jne loop3
			cmp [r8 + 184], 'memfs01'
			jne loop3
			cmp [r8 + 255], rbx
			jne loop3
			cmp [r8 + 376], rax
			jne loop3
			cmp [r8 + 447], 5
			jne loop3
		exitcase:
			@call,exit,rax

	Hello, World, using the std.smsl instead of glb.smsl

			@call,dial,'*dsplfs','*tty','in'
			cmp r12, 1
			jne exitcase
			cmp r11, 2
			jl exitcase
			mov [r8], 'hi'
			@call,signal,'*myfs','*myid','*dsplfs','*tty',6
			@call,poll,'*dsplfs','*tty','*myfs','*myid',5,32
		exitcase:
			@call,exit,'*myfs'

( docs )                                                                         ( docs )

