( docs )                                                                                 ( docs )

Plan 12 Architecture and Specifcation
Specifcatio Version 2

Plan 12
	Plan 12 is a theoretical operatind system based on the premice of proper
	and unified filesystem operations as hardware and software interfacing
	and abstraction. The Plan 12 architecture is designed to reduce system
	complexity dramaticly. It does this by providing a unified file-oriented
	interface for system, hardware and process management.

	In the Plan 12 architecture, everything usable is a file. Processes are
	represented by files

Specifics
	IPC/process communication
		Signals - A signal is an ultralight message requesting a process 
			  perform a general action, read/write a buffer, perform
			  a logical operation, signal completion, perform a
			  process-specific operation, or more depending on the 
			  implimentation.
		Buffers - A buffer is a heavyweight data sharing primitive. A shared
			  file managed by signals for syncronus reads and writes able
			  to hold large data.

		These two basic concepts should be first-class system primitives. 
		Others may be added into the base system, but these should be included.

	Processes and process bootkeeping
		Process files - A process file is a file used to bootkeep a process. 
				It should contain all hardware-specific and
				implimentation-specific data to manage, scedule and
				start/stop the process at any moment.
		State file    - A state file is a file used to bootkeep a process save
				point. This should contain all of the information used
				to start a process, and optionally restart it.
		System file   - This file is used to represent the filesystem in
				question that process data is being stored in. This can
				be used to only represent the filesystem and have 
				scheduling state offloaded, or it can be used to represent
				both filesystem and scheduling state.

		This is generally reguarded as the absolute bare minimum. These should be
		included into the base system as a primitive, but others may be added to 
		the release of said Plan 12 system if needed.

	Sceduling
		Sceduling is not defined by the Plan 12 specifcation and is up to
		the implimentation to impliment fully. However, the system and 
		state files should be included into the system to represent scheduling
		in some way. Besides this representation, the release of said Plan 12
		system should be able to impliment any they choose, as long as it can be
		represented by said files.

	Hardware management
		Hardware is to be managed in a way simular to standard processes. 
		The specific details are up to the hardware device and implimentation
		but should follow a few methods
		
		signal-based copy  - Poll for signals and perform buffer operations
				     based on said signal types.
		always-active copy - Constant-copy data from a hardware device to a
				     buffer or from a buffer to a hardware device.

		These types should be present in a Plan 12 system, as they are generally
		the base used to create other types. Other types can be included as 
		primitives, but these primitives must be included.

		It is standard for hardware to be implimented as a subset of individual
		processes per device, but this is not required. However, the hardware
		management system/subsystem must expose hardware in a uniform way that
		is simular to or directly using the primitives of IPC.

	Permission enforcement
		The Plan 12 architecture requres no permission enforcement but does
		not demand it not be present. However, it is heavily encouraged, if
		the enforcement is present, for it to be emergent from the system 
		structure instead of a primitive or manager system. Keep in mind
		none of this is requred.

	Kernel(s) or lack of
		The Plan 12 architecture (by design) does NOT require any kernel or
		central manager in any way. This is one of the major advantages of
		the Plan 12 architecture. However, this is not a requirement. A 
		Plan 12 system is allowed to have a kernel or central manager, but it
		is very strongly discouraged.

	Time or lack of
		The Plan 12 architecture does NOT require the system to have a concept of
		time. I know, very shocking, but time is not needed. Some features added
		by a release of a Plan 12 system may require a concept of time, but the 
		Plan 12 spec does not require it, nor does the reference implimentation
		impliment a concept of time in any way.

		We like to brag about this, as Plan 12 is a time-less system.
		Get it? The double meaning of time-less, as in stands for all time as well
		as the literal of not having a concept of time. I am so funny.

// TODO - aquire the confidence to remove this horrible joke

// TODO - finish spec

// TODO - write compatability requirements

Tooling
	A Plan 12 system must be fully self hosting. This is a very hard requirement.
	All software or code for the release must be able to be 
	compiled/assembled/stubbed on the version itself. 
		
	A Plan 12 system also must have an assembler for the architecture. The 
	assembler must support all instructions used by the output code or binaries 
	as well as the concept of labels. This assembler must be placed under the 
	name 'ASSEMBLE' in the standard Plan 12 shell.

	All releases of Plan 12 must contain some form of the Plan 12 shell and all
	operations that can be performed by the shell.

The Plan 12 Shell
	The Plan 12 shell is a universal Plan 12 interface. It is based on a 
	programming language first seen in a later version of vp12 5. This language 
	is based on the concepts of stream re-direction and manipulation. The 
	characters '/ ' indicat that the shell is ready to recieve input.

	This shell follows the model of setting an input stream, setting operations 
	to perform on said input stream, and setting an output stream. This is a 
	native dataflow and operation language designed to express the modifcation 
	of flowing data in a dead simple and expressive way.

	The syntax follows
		((input type marker):(input data), ordered based on appearance, 
		comma separated) (input marker) ((operation wrappers)(operations)) 
		(output marker) ((output type marker):(output), ordered based on appearance, 
		comma separated)

	Where input type marker being how to intepret the input stream, the input data being
	the input stream itself, the input marker being how to merge the stream at input, the
	the wrappers being wrappers around operations, the operations being the operations to
	perform on the input streams, the output marker marking how to merge the streams on
	output, the output type marker being how to intepret the output stream, and the 
	output being where to output the stream to.

	It is best to think of this language as a sequential, flowing operation, as this is 
	how the language functions at the fundamental level.

	These types must be included in the implimentation of the shell language, unless the
	version of said operating system architecture has no concept of said item - 
		* Type Marker

			These are used to mark how to intepret the input data and how to
			retrieve it.

			fs-(fsname)   - address a file in a filesystem
			mem-(address) - address a memory region
			reg-(regname) - address a register
			stream-a      - address a stream inline of ASCII
			stream-b      - address a stream inline of binary
			stream-d      - address a stream inline of decimal
			stream-h      - address a stream inline of hex

		Input Marker

			These are used to know how to format the input streams.

			<  - one input stream - merge all items listed into one single stream
			<< - multiple input streams - merge all items listed into multiple
			     input streams separated by the special character of choice
			     of the implimentation

		Output Marker

			These are used to know how to format the output streams

			>  - one output stream - merge all items listed into one single stream
			>> - multiple output streams - merge all items listed into multiple
			     input streams separated by the special character of choice
			     of the implimentation

		Operation Wrappers

			These are used to set conditional values based on operations

			SET((operation)) - sets the SET bit if the output stream is nonzero
			IF((operation))  - only performs the operation if the SET bit is set
			INV		 - invert the SET bit

			Operations inside of SET wrappers don't effect the normal stream. They copy
			the stream data into a new location and use this new stream instead.
			This new stream only lasts for the duration of the wrapper. However, the
			SET bit does last outside the duration.


		Operations

		These are actions to perform on the current data stream. All operations can
		take a final operand of, in brackets, to mark how to chunk it before
		perfoming the operation. Essentially, a primitive to break the data into
		chunks before the op. If this is not specified, then it will be assumed
		to be split into one even chunk. The chunking can be set as b for bits, B
		for bytes, or e for even splits (as in break into N even chunks).

		Basic
			ADD(value) - Add to the current stream
			SUB(value) - Subtract from the current stream
			MUL(value) - multiply to the current stream
			DIV(value) - divide from the current stream
			
		Logical
			AND  - perform an AND operation
			OR   - perform an OR operation
			NOT  - perform a NOT operation
			XOR  - perform a XOR operation
			NAND - perform a NAND operation
			NOR  - perform a NOR operation
			XNOR - perform an XNOR operation

		Shift
			LSHFTv(value) - perform a logical left shift operation N times
			RSHFTv(value) - perform a logical right shift operation N times
			LSHFT	      - perform a logical left shift operation
			RSHFT	      - perform a logical right shift operation

		inc/dec
			INC 	    - incriment stream
			DEC 	    - decriment stream
			INCv(value) - incriment in a loop N times
			DECv(value) - decriment in a loop N times

		Sorting
			FIND"(type):(value)"   - find data of types supported by the * Type 
					       Marker - set the stream to nonzero if found, zero
					       the stream if not found
			REMOVE"(type):(value)" - find and remove data of types supported by the *
					       Type Marker - set the stream to nonzero if found,
					       zero stream if not found
			REPLACE/"(input type):(input)/(output type):(output)"
						Find and replace data of types supported by the
						* Type Marker

// TODO - finish shell

		Programs
			EDIT     - Standard editor utility (described later)
			ASSEMBLE - Standard assembler utility (described later)

// TODO - finish programs

	This language is designed to be used for standard user interfacing and interaction with 
	a Plan 12 system. Said Plan 12 system is allowed to add as many functions to the language
	as they wish, but the ones listed must remain. The functions may be loadable modules, 
	builtins, or any other method the developer of said release feels fits best.

	A few examples of using this could be
		(for said examples, a few things will be assumed for simplicity - we assume this
		version of Plan 12 used for the example has a concept of a filesystem and uses UNIX
		filesystem paths. We will also assume said version of Plan 12 also has the concept
		of this shell and is fully compliant with the Plan 12 spec version 2.)

		
		/ fs-examplefs:/dir/file < SET(FIND"string-d:18")IF(ADD12) > fs-examplefs:/dir/out

			This program will
				Take a file at '/dir/file' formatted under 'examplefs' format, 
				take it as one input stream, create a new stream and set the SET
				bit if the binary data '18' was found in the new stream, set the 
				current stream back to the inital and discard the temporary stream,
				check if the SET bit is set, and if so, add 12 to the current
				stream, and finally take the current stream and output it to the
				file path '/dir/out' formatted as filesystem format 'examplefs'.

// TODO - finish examples

		Although this language may seem simple, it is incredibly versatile and flexible.

Compliance
	Compliance with the Plan 12 architecture must be given approval by the creator of
	the Plan 12 operating system, known as vantheman. Certifcation is not official, 
	but is simply a first-party audit of the operating system in question and a 
	response pointing out everything (if anything) not compliant with the Plan 12
	spec.

	There are 5 classes of compliance, each with varying levels of commitment to the
	architecture.

		Class 1 - compliant
			This is the class for systems compliant fully with the architecture of
			Plan 12 and comply with the utility standards. Operating systems in this
			class should be able to call themseles a Plan 12 'compliant' or 'Class 1'
			system. 
			An example could be vp12, the reference for Plan 12.

		Class 2 - architectually compliant
			This is the class for systems complian with the architecture specifcation
			of Plan 12, but not compliant with the utility specifcation. Operating
			systems in this class should be able to call themselves a system based
			on the Plan 12 architecture.
			An example could be an embeddeed Plan 12 system without the full
			functionality of a Class 1 system.

		Class 3 - compatable
			This is the class for systems not compliant at the base level, but are
			compliant at a Class 1 or 2 using some sort of compatability layer. This
			should not be a full PC emulator or hypervisor, but some userland-level
			(if said OS has a concept of userland) compatability layer or translation
			system.
			An example could be if a UNIX/POSIX system added a userspace program
			simulating a Plan 12 Class 2 system.

		Class 4 - useful
			This is the class for systems not compliant with the architecture 
			specifcation, but do have ports of the utilities to run nativly on
			the operating system. Essentially, they can run the utilities defined
			by the utilities specifcation, but they are not compliant with the
			architecture specifcation.
			An example could be a UNIX/POSIX system with the utilities ported to
			run nativly on the system.

		Class 5 - irrelvient
			This is the class for systems netiher compliant with the architecture
			or utlitity specifcations. A non-Plan 12 system.
			An example could be a UNIX/POSIX system, eg. 4.3BSD.

12P
	12P is the universal data transfer protocol of Plan 12 systems. This protocol
	is designed to be mostly implimentation-independent, lightweight, and high in
	performance. Just as Plan 12 is, 12P is simply a standard, and specifics of the
	protocol are up to the version of Plan 12 to decide. 12P uses it's own filesystem
	type, known as 12pfsf (12P FileSystem Format), simular to the vp12sdfsf (Vans Plan
	12 Simple Disk FileSystem Format).

	A 12P version string should state three values; 12P version, 12P implimentation 
	and 12P implimentation version. This allows the software handling the transaction
	to know if the other machine is compatable with it, and if not, how it should handle
	the transaction.

	12P is a standard data sync protocol based on broadcasting. Machines broadcast
	data across any form of data transfer line. This means the protocol has no concept
	of clients or hosts, but instead two or more peers sharing data and notifying the
	other when they make a change to the data.

	At startup of the 12P service handler, there should be a random 64bit binary number
	assiagned to the machine to represent it. This number should be used to identify
	the machine during 12P transactions, and should be known as the Machine ID.

	Packets should start with a short 4-bit binary number to identify the type of the
	packet. Yes, this is intentionally very small, as there should not be many packet
	types in the protocol. They should contain the machine ID of the sending machine 
	after this.

	Fields not filled should be filled with zeros in the front until full.

	The packets of the protocol are
		Packet type 1

			This is the packet used to figure out what machines are on the network and
			determine compatability between machines. This packet is used to describe
			the machine sending the packet and request other machines send packet type
			1 over the network with the machine ID of the machine they are checking
			compatability against if they are compatable. This allows a machine to simply
			send a packet type of 1 over the network to get all compatable machines on
			the network. Machines not compatable should simply ignore the packet and not
			identify themselves.

			This packet uses the packet number of 0001 (1).

			32B - logical microarch name (ASCII), eg'TigerLake'
			8B  - logical arch name (ASCII, all lowercase), eg 'amd64'
			2b  - logical endianness name (binary number), eg 00 for big, 01 for little.
			16B - Plan 12 implimentation name (ASCII), eg 'VP12'
			16b - Plan 12 implimentation version (half-precision floating-point number)
			16b - Plan 12 version (half-precision floating-point number), eg '1.1'
			4b  - Plan 12 compliance version (binary number), eg '3' for class 3
			16b - 12P version (half-precision floating-point number), eg '2'
			16B - 12P implimentation name (ASCII), eg 'V12P'
			16b - 12P implimenation version (half-precision floating-point number), eg '1.2'

		Packet type 2

			This is the packet used to request filesystem layouts of the system, as in
			to allow one system to ask another, 'what are the filesystems I should be 
			allowed to select'. This can include all filesystems on the machine or just 
			filesystems formatted as 12pfs, as this choice is up to the implimentation.

			This packet uses the packet number of 0010 (2).

			First, a binary number stating the number of file systems to be given should be
			presented. This number should be 8 bits in size.

			Next, for each filesystem presented, 

				32B - name of the filesystem format (ASCII) eg. '12pfs' for a 12p file system.
				64b - size of the filesystem in bytes (binary number) eg. 32 for 512 bytes.
				8b  - filesystem ID (randomly generated binary number), eg 118

				32 ASCII return characters should mark the end of the fileystem.

		Packet type 3

			This is the packet to allow a machine to select a filesystem from one of the
			presented selections.

			This packet uses the packet number of 0011 (3).

			This packet should only contain the filesystem ID stated in the last packet
			of the filesystem the machine wishes to select.

		Packet type 4

			This is the packet used to send the filesystem data back to the machine 
			requesting it initally. 

			This packet should use the packet number of 0100 (4).

			8b - filesystem ID of the selected filesystem
			the filesystem data itself

		Packet type 5

			This is the packet used to sync a filesystem with another machine.

			This packet should use the packet number of 0101 (5).

			8b - number of linear changed blocks being sent

			For every linear area changed, 
				64b - start of logical change block (binary number)
				64b - end of logical change block (binary number)
				8b  - number of linear block (binary number)
				The data in these areas
				32 ASCII newline characters, marking the end of the area

		Packet type 6

			This packet is the logical acknollage, or ACK, packet of this protocol.

			This packet should use the packet ID of 0110 (6).

		Packet type 7

			This packet means the machine sending is performing a logical acknollage
			without acceptance. Aka, I see you, but I do not like you.

			This packet should use a packet number of 0111 (7).

		Packet type 8

			This packet marks a generic error.

			This packet uses the packet number of 1000 (8).

( docs )                                                                                 ( docs )
